Postperfusion lung syndrome: physiopathology and therapeutic options. by Yuan SM
Postperfusion lung syndrome is rare but can be lethal. The underlying mechanism
remains uncertain but triggering inflammatory cascades have become an accepted
etiology. A better understanding of the pathophysiology and the roles of inflammatory
mediators in the development of the syndrome is imperative in the determination of
therapeutic options and promotion of patients' prognosis and survival. Postperfusion
lung syndrome is similar to adult respiratory distress syndrome in clinical features,
diagnostic approaches and management strategies. However, the etiologies and
predisposing risk factors may differ between each other. The prognosis of the
postperfusion lung syndrome can be poorer in comparison to acute respiratory distress
syndrome due to the secondary multiple organ failure and triple acid-base imbalance.
Current management strategies are focusing on attenuating inflammatory responses and
preventing from pulmonary ischemia-reperfusion injury. Choices of cardiopulmonary
bypass circuit and apparatus, innovative cardiopulmonary bypass techniques, modified
surgical maneuvers and several pharmaceutical agents can be potential preventive
strategies for acute lung injury during cardiopulmonary bypass.

Síndrome pós-perfusão pulmonar é rara, mas pode ser letal. O mecanismo subjacente
permanece incerto, mas desencadear cascatas inflamatórias tornou-se uma etiologia
aceita. É imperativo uma melhor compreensão da fisiopatologia e os papéis de
mediadores inflamatórios no desenvolvimento da síndrome na determinação de opções
terapêuticas e de promoção do prognóstico e sobrevida dos pacientes. Síndrome
pós-perfusão pulmonar é semelhante à síndrome da angústia respiratória do adulto em
características clínicas, métodos diagnósticos e estratégias de gestão. No entanto,
as etiologias e fatores de risco predisponentes podem ser diferentes entre si. O
prognóstico da síndrome pós-perfusão pulmonar pode ser mais pobres em comparação com
síndrome da angústia respiratória aguda, devido à falência de múltiplos órgãos
secundária e desequilíbrio ácido-base triplo. Estratégias de gestão atuais centram-se
em atenuar reações inflamatórias e impedir lesão pulmonar de isquemia-reperfusão.
Escolhas do circuito de circulação extracorpórea e aparelhos, técnicas inovadoras de
circulação extracorpórea, manobras cirúrgicas modificadas e vários agentes
farmacêuticos podem ser potenciais estratégias preventivas para lesão pulmonar aguda
durante a circulação extracorpórea.

Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), also known as respiratory distress syndrome,
adult respiratory distress syndrome, or shock lung, is a fatal pulmonary parenchymal
disorder as sequelae of respiratory infection, trauma, or stress triggered by pulmonary
cytokine release, impaired endothelial barriers and surfactant deficiency resulting in
fluid accumulation in the distal airspaces, fibrotic changes and eventually impaired gas
exchange. The ARDS that develops early after cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is known as
postperfusion or post-pump syndrome, which remains a significant clinical problem on
those patients receiving heart operations under CPB[1]. In the early years, postperfusion lung syndrome was taken as a
prerequisite condition of cardiac surgical patients that may develop into ARDS if it is
not properly treated[2]. However, this
argument is not supported by modern theories. Postperfusion lung syndrome is rare but
refractory. It was reported that the incidence of postperfusion lung syndrome was
1-2%[3], but the mortality could
be as high as 91.6%, with 70% patients developing multiple organ failure[4]. An early diagnosis and timely treatment
are crucial for the patients' outcomes.

A consensus committee has provided objective criteria for the diagnosis of ARDS, and has
defined acute lung injury (ALI) as a less severe form of ARDS[5]. In 1994, the American-European Consensus Conference on
ARDS set the criteria for the diagnosis of ALI and ARDS[6]. Both ALI and ARDS were characterized by an acute onset,
bilateral pulmonary infiltrations on chest X-ray and pulmonary wedge pressure <18
mmHg. The only differential criterion for both disorders was arterial oxygen tension
(PaO2)/fractional inspired oxygen (FiO2) <300 mmHg in ALI,
but PaO2/FiO2 <200 mmHg in ARDS. In 2012, the Berlin Definition
was developed, focusing on feasibility, reliability, validity and objective evaluation
of the performances. ARDS was classified into 3 levels based on degree of hypoxemia:
mild (200 mmHg < PaO2/FiO2 ≤300 mmHg) moderate (100 mmHg
<PaO2/FiO2 ≤200 mmHg) and severe
(PaO2/FiO2 ≤100 mmHg); and 4 ancillary variables for severe
ARDS: radiographic severity, respiratory system compliance (≤40 mL/cmH2O),
positive end-expiratory pressure (≥10 cmH2O) and corrected expired volume per
minute (≥10 L/min)[7]. The pulmonary
inflammatory responses subsequent to CPB mostly result in subclinical symptoms, but may
lead to major organ dysfunction and multiple organ failure including ARDS in only 2% of
the patients[4]. In spite of rarity,
ALI/ARDS remains the important cause leading to patients' death[8]. CPB may be of considerable pulmonary
pathophysiological consequences in terms of the alveolar-arterial oxygenation gradient
[P(A-a)O2], intrapulmonary shunt, degree of pulmonary edema, pulmonary
compliance and pulmonary vascular resistance, and may eventually lead to pulmonary
dysfunction[7]. The respiratory
dysfunction can be a result of pulmonary ischemia-reperfusion injury, interstitial edema
and impaired microcirculation induced by CPB with activated cytokines, enhanced reactive
oxygen species and reduced endogenous nitric oxide production[9,10]. At present,
the underlying mechanisms of postoperative ALI/ARDS still remain uncertain and the
pathophysiological aspects have not been comprehensively stated. A better understanding
of the pathophysiology and roles of inflammatory mediators in the development of the
syndrome is imperative in the determination of therapeutic options and promotion of
patients' prognosis and survival[11].
This article aims to highlight postperfusion lung syndrome in terms of the pertinent
pathophysiological changes, mechanisms and risk factors as well as the potentially
effective management and preventive strategies.

Both ARDS and postperfusion lung syndrome have similar mechanisms of triggering
inflammatory processes. They also share similar clinical features, diagnostic approaches
and management strategies. However, their etiologies and predisposing risk factors
differ between each other. As the pulmonary pathologies are more severe in the patients
with postperfusion lung syndrome, the prognosis of these patients are always poorer than
those with ARDS. The multiple organ failure rate was likely to be higher in the patients
with postperfusion lung syndrome than with ARDS. Ge et al.[12] reported 15 patients with ARDS, the extrapulmonary
organ failure involving 0, 1, 2 and 3 organs were found in 20% (3/15), 20% (3/15), 26.7%
(4/15) and 33.3% (5/15) patients, respectively with the heart being the most involved
organ followed by kidney, digestive tract, central nervous system, hematological system
and liver. The mortalities were respectively 0% (0/3), 33.3% (1/3), 50% (2/4) and 100%
(5/5) with an overall mortality of 53.3% (8/15). The major similarities and differences
between the two syndromes are listed in Table
1.

Major differentiations between acute respiratory distress syndrome and
postperfusion lung syndrome.

CPB=cardiopulmonary bypass

PaO2/FiO2, PaO2 and arterial/alveolar oxygen
tension ratio [P(A/a)O2] are all simple and noninvasive indicators of
pulmonary gas exchange impairment. PaO2 is easily influenced by
mechanical ventilation and FiO2 and also influenced by geographic
diversity and patient's age. As PaO2 decreases in all types of
respiratory failure, it cannot reflect the actual respiratory function and may
therefore be less reliable, but leading to a delayed diagnosis if taken for an
early diagnosis of ARDS[17].
P(A-a)O2 is an indicator of gas exchange (oxygen intake) impairment.
Increase of P(A-a)O2 mean deficiency of gas exchange and is likely to
be more sensitive than the decrease of PaO2. As P(A-a)O2 is
affected by FiO2, its use in patients with oxygen therapy is limited.
It is also affected by patient's age, position, cardiac output, oxygen
dissociation curve and closing capacity. PaO2/FiO2, also
termed as oxygenation index, shows a good correlation with intrapulmonary
shunting, and can better reflect anoxia even in the condition of oxygen therapy.
PaO2/FiO2 is affected by methods of oxygen supply and
oxygen concentration, and hence it is an indicator of impairments of the pulmonary
vascular beds and alveoli, irrelevant to extrapulmonary organ failure[18].

Respiratory index (RI) is the ratio of P(A-a)O2 to PaO2,
less affected by ventilation method or FiO2. Therefore, it may reflect
the actual pulmonary function and is helpful in the early diagnosis of ARDS. The
normal range of RI is 0.1-0.3. RI ≥2.5 represents a high risk for the development
of ARDS, and RI ≥3.0 is a diagnostic indicator of ARDS[19]. RI <2.5 as shown in daily repeated blood-gas
analysis can be an indicator for safe extubation[20]. ARDS patients with sustained RI elevation may
eventually develop multiple organ failure[21].

Type II cells are thicker, square-shaped cells and their main function is to
produce surfactant. Surfactant plays an essential role in preventing the alveoli
from collapsing. Increase in capillary endothelial and/or alveolar epithelial
permeability and pulmonary surfactant deficiency from type II cell impairment may
inevitably result in pulmonary compliance reduction. The inflammatory process and
alveolar flooding lead to severe ventilation-perfusion mismatch and intrapulmonary
shunt, which are manifested clinically as severe hypoxia with a decrease in the
PaO2/FiO2 ratio. Generally, with a marked reduction in
lung compliance, the work of breathing and the physiologic dead space increase.
Mechanical ventilation may reverse hypoxemia of ALI and prevent from developing
into ARDS. However, airway injury and hypokinemia may occur under the treatment of
a high positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) and positive pressure support. This
may in turn worsen the systemic inflammatory reactions and lead to extrapulmonary
organ dysfunction or failure[22]. With increasing PEEP, PaO2/FiO2 increases
and static lung compliance stabilizes. However, a 20-cmH2O PEEP can be
a turning point of PaO2/FiO2 and static lung compliance
fall[23].

Clinical studies revealed close positive correlations between PEEP, cardiac output
or peak pressure of airway and PaO2/FiO2, and weak
correlations between PaO2/FiO2 and oxygen supply or static
lung compliance (Figure 1)[23]. Pulmonary dynamic compliance and
oxygenation index correlated significantly in ARDS patients irrespective of
patients' outcome (Figure 2)[24]. In ALI models, RI correlated
positively, but PaO2/FiO2 correlated negatively to plasma
soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1, showing a significant correlation in
the experimental other than in the control group (Figure 3)[25].

Linear correlations between respiratory mechanics and
PaO2/FiO2
[23].

PaO2/FiO2=arterial oxygen tension/fractional inspired
oxygen; PEEP=positive end-expiratory pressure

Linear correlations between pulmonary dynamic compliance and oxygenation
index in patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome[24]. Upper panel=cured
patients; Lower panel=dead patients.
PaO2/FiO2=arterial oxygen tension/fractional inspired
oxygen

Linear correlations between soluble intercellular adhesion molecule-1 and
respiratory index or PaO2/FiO2
[25]. Left panel=control
group; Right panel=experimental group with intercellular adhesion molecule-1
antibody 2 mg/kg was given to the rabbit;
PaO2/FiO2=arterial oxygen tension/ fractional inspired
oxygen; ICAM=intercellular adhesion molecule

Extravascular lung water is the fluid distributed beyond the pulmonary vessels. It
is composed of intracellular, intra-alveolar and alveolar interstitial fluid.
Little intracellular fluid change stands out the effects of intra-alveolar and
alveolar interstitial fluid in the formation of pulmonary edema. Increase of
extravascular lung water is a prominent feature of ARDS and the actual reason for
refractory hypoxemia. Clinically, extravascular lung water index (EVLWI) is an
indicator for the description of extravascular lung water. The normal range of
EVLWI is 3.0-7.0 mL/kg. An EVLWI >7.0 mL/kg suggests the presence of pulmonary
edema[26]. Extravascular
lung water positively correlated with lung injury severity and oxygenation but
negatively correlated pulmonary compliance[27]. Stratified analysis illustrated a strong negative
correlation between EVLWI and PaO2/FiO2 when EVLWI ≥12 mL/kg
and also a strong negative correlation between pulmonary vascular permeability
index and PaO2/FiO2 when pulmonary vascular permeability
index ≥5[28]. Kushimoto et
al.[29] found, in a
multicenter retrospective study, that the severity of ARDS closely correlated with
increase of EVLWI and pulmonary vascular permeability index. A report also
stressed on that EVLWI may be associated with severity of ARDS, ventilation
duration, Intensive Care Unit stay and mortality[30]. EVLWI is therefore a useful tool for the
evaluation of pulmonary function, superior to PaO2/FiO2 and
chest roentgenogram.

The major etiology of hypoxia in ARDS patients is functional intrapulmonary
shunting. A pulmonary shunt is a condition of ventilation-perfusion mismatch with
normal blood perfusion but insufficient ventilation of the lungs. Intrapulmonary
shunting has a close relation negative to PaO2/FiO2, but
positive to P(A-a)O2
[31], and is also affected by
pulmonary artery wedge pressure and cardiac index[32]. Normally, pulmonary shunt is 2-5%[33]. The intrapulmonary shunt is
optimal in assessing the severity of hypoxemia. An intrapulmonary shunt <15% as
well as P(A-a)O2 difference <75 mmHg is helpful for the exclusion of
ARDS[34]. A shunt of
10-19% usually does not need ventilation support; whereas a shunt of 20-29% can be
a fatal sign in patients with impaired cardiac function, and a shunt >30%
requires circulatory support[35]. In normal subjects and experimental animals with ARDS, PEEP did
not alter the distribution of blood flow; the apparent perfusion ratio remained
constant when PEEP was increased from 5 to 10 cmH2O[36]. However, when a positive
end-expiratory plateau was added to intermittent positive pressure ventilation,
intrapulmonary shunting may decrease and the disrupted surfactant production may
take into action[37].

In the early stage of ARDS, respiratory alkalosis is the most common type of
acid-base imbalance followed by metabolic acidosis and combined respiratory
alkalosis and metabolic alkalosis. In its late stage, patients may develop
respiratory acidosis, respiratory acidosis associated with metabolic acidosis and
even triple acid-base imbalance. The triple acid-base imbalance can be a
respiratory alkalosis or a respiratory acidosis type. The respiratory alkalosis
type is respiratory alkalosis associated with metabolic acidosis and metabolic
alkalosis, which is often developed from uncorrected primary respiratory
alkalosis, while using diuretics and glucocorticoids (for metabolic alkalosis), or
in the presence of severe hypoxia, renal dysfunction, or shock (for metabolic
acidosis) and electrolyte imbalance (hypokalemia, normal or high blood chloride,
and normal or reduced blood sodium). Patients with this type triple acid-base
imbalance are often with a poor outcome[38].

The respiratory acidosis type triple acid-base imbalance is respiratory acidosis
associated with metabolic acidosis and metabolic alkalosis, which is less common
but may occur in the condition of reduced ventilation and carbon dioxide
retention, often associated with normal or high blood potassium and normal or
reduced blood chloride and sodium [38].

The exact mechanism of postperfusion lung syndrome remains uncertain, but it may
probably be due to the inflammatory cascade induced by contact between blood and CPB
circuit and the subsequent activations of leukocytes, platelets, coagulation and
fibrinolysis system and kallikrein-bradykinin and complement system. After crossclamp
removal, joint actions of protease release by leukocytes in the pulmonary vascular beds,
production of oxygen free radicals and intestinal endotoxin translocation lead to
increased pulmonary microvascular permeability, microthrombus formation in the pulmonary
vessels and the quality and quantity changes of pulmonary surfactant predispose to the
development of postperfusion lung syndrome[39]. The significant complement activation and organ neutrophil
sequestration contribute to vascular injury, and hence patients undergoing cardiac
operation under CPB showed increased circulating endotoxin and tumor necrosis factor
(TNF) levels[40,41].

Alveolar macrophages are prone to be activated, releasing many inflammatory mediators
including TNF-α, interleukin (IL)-6 and IL-8 and superoxide dismutase, etc., and
damaging vascular endothelium and alveolar epithelium, thus making the lungs being the
first target organ of insult. TNF-α and IL-6 may cause direct lung injury effects by
inducing early inflammatory reactions, releasing toxic products and increasing pulmonary
permeability[42]. In the lung,
TNF-α is generated by activated pulmonary macrophages and accumulates in the
bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of ALI patients[43]. The pathogenesis of TNF-α with receptors in neutrophil
activation and infiltration of lung injury remain unclear. However, it has been noted
that neutrophil accumulation and lung leak were abrogated in mice lacking the p55 TNF-α
receptor[44]. TNF-α also
stimulates the adhesions of the endothelial cells and neutrophils, and impacts a toxic
effect by release of proteases, oxygen free radicals and superoxide dismutase.
Productions of ILs including ILs-1, -2, -6 and -8 would be increased by stimulations of
mon-macrocytes strengthening the lung injury. Accordingly, an early appearance of TNF-α
may herald the development of ARDS and the synthesis and secretion of ILs.

Both direct and indirect lung injuries can be predisposing risk factors leading to ARDS.
Surgical trauma and CPB are among indirect risk factors[13]. Christenson et al.[2] reported insufficient perfusion of visceral organs
caused by low output syndrome and prolonged hypotension might be responsible for the
development of postperfusion lung syndrome. Rady et al.[45] observed that early postoperative pulmonary dysfunction
was associated with preoperative (age ≥75 years, body mass index ≥ 30 kg/m2,
mean pulmonary arterial pressure ≥ 20 mmHg, stroke volume index ≥30 mL/m2,
serum albumin and history of cerebral vascular disease), operative (emergency surgery
and CPB duration ≥140 min) and postoperative variables (hematocrit ≥30%, mean arterial
pressure ≥90 mmHg and cardiac index ≥3.0 L/min/m2). Besides, preoperative
cardiac function impairment, bloodstream infection, prolonged crossclamp and operation
durations, hypotension episodes and hypogammaglobulinemia can be risk factors of
postperfusion lung syndrome[46].

Apostolakis et al.[47] summarized
preventive strategies for operative lung injury, which included choices of CPB circuit
(use of miniaturized circuits of CPB and circuit with biocompatible surfaces
ultrafiltration) and apparatus (leukocyte depletion filters and ultrafiltration),
innovative CPB techniques (partial restoration of pulmonary artery perfusion during
CPB), modified surgical maneuvers (reducing the use of cardiotomy suction device and
reducing the contact-time between free blood and pericardium) and medicinal agents
(corticosteroids and aprotinin) as preventive strategies for ALI during CPB, which were
proved to be of satisfactory outcomes on improving the lung function. Moreover,
hyperonocotic CPB-prime with hydroxyethyl starch 10% (200:0.5) may improve cardiac
function and reduce pulmonary water content in the early postoperative period[48]. Studies have shown that Travenol
bubble oxygenator was associated with significant increases of EVLWI and pulmonary
vascular resistance and greater blood component trauma than the membrane[49], and bubble oxygenators caused more
leukocyte sequestrations[50]. Care has
to be taken with choice of oxygenator in risky patients.

Mechanical ventilation remains the primary support technique for ARDS. New
ventilation strategies, such as high-frequency oscillatory ventilation appear to be
promising[51]. However, in
patients with ALI/ARDS, mechanical ventilation with a lower tidal volume (6 mL/kg)
than is traditionally used[52]. Low
tidal volume ventilation reduces volutrauma, and is the standard care for ARDS
patients with mechanical ventilation. A strategy of low tidal volume ventilation of
6-8 mL/kg reduces absolute mortality by about 7-9% in comparison to using ≥10 mL/kg
tidal volumes. Mechanically ventilated patients with ARDS appear to tolerate very low
blood pH and very high carbon dioxide partial pressure without any adverse sequelae.
Based on this theory, permissive hypercapnia can be attempted in ARDS patients in
order to achieve normal blood gas values.

Adequate PEEP levels avoid alveolar collapse and maintain sufficient pulmonary volume
at the end of expiration. Excessive PEEP increases the risk of pneumothorax and
airway impairment, causing adverse hemodynamic effects by increasing intra-thoracic
pressure and reducing venous return. Meanwhile, inadequately low PEEP level provokes
cyclic alveolar collapse and re-opening, resulting in atelectrauma[51]. Most ventilation modes used in ARDS
are those cycled by time and controlled by volume or pressure. In ARDS patients
randomized to high frequency oscillatory ventilation, mortality was significantly
reduced and so was the treatment failure rate comparing to conventional
ventilation[53]. Recruitment
is a strategy aimed at re-expanding collapsed lung tissue, and then maintaining high
PEEP to prevent subsequent "de-recruitment". Various ventilation modes such as
inverse ratio pressure-controlled ventilation, airway-pressure release ventilation
and even high-frequency oscillatory ventilation have been used to promote
recruitment[54].

Prone positioning improves gas exchange and has long been used as an adjunct or
salvage therapy for severe or refractory ARDS. A strategy employing higher PEEP along
with low tidal volume ventilation should be considered for ARDS patients receiving
mechanical ventilation. ARDS patients receiving higher PEEP had a strong trend toward
improved survival. However, higher PEEP had a strong trend toward harm as higher PEEP
can conceivably cause ventilator-induced lung injury by increasing plateau pressures,
or cause pneumothorax or decreased cardiac output[55].

Surfactant therapy has shown beneficial effects on oxygenation and survival of
children with ALI/ARDS, however, no effect or even adverse effects of exogenous
surfactant has been shown on survival in adult patients[56-58].
Instillation of a natural lung surfactant (calfactant) contains high levels of
surfactant-specific protein B. Calfactant (2 doses of 80 mL/m2
calfactant, 12 hours apart) acutely improved oxygenation and significantly
decreased mortality in infants, children and adolescents with ALI[59].

Nitric oxide is a powerful endogenous vasodilator. A placebo-controlled study
demonstrated that the ARDS patients receiving 5 ppm inhaled nitric oxide showed
significantly improved oxygenation parameters with better survival comparing with
placebo[60]. Some authors
suspected the role of inhaled nitric oxide in ARDS. They found by incorporating
the results of 14 randomized clinical trials that inhaled nitric oxide resulted in
a transient improvement in oxygenation without reducing mortality but was probably
harmful[61]. Therefore
physicians have to take care when using this agent for ARDS.

Prostaglandins are endogenous derivatives of arachidonic acid with properties of
vasodilation, platelet aggregation inhibition and anti-inflammation. Inhaled
prostacyclins cause selective pulmonary vasodilation, thereby enhancing lung
function by improving ventilation-perfusion mismatch and oxygenation and by
reducing pulmonary vascular resistance[62]. Inhaled prostaglandin E2 had a comparable
effect to nitric oxide on pulmonary vasculature and oxygenation with minimal
systemic effects[62]. Continuous
infusion of prostaglandin E1 may induce oxygen delivery and obtain
better tissue oxygenation, while increasing cardiac output[63]. Prostacyclin is also a promising
vasodilator in decreasing pulmonary artery pressure and improving
PaO2/FiO2
[64], but it may cause
compromised hemodynamics[65].

Glucocorticoids can reduce inflammation and fibrosis through inhibition of several
cytokines including ILs-1, -3, -5, -6 and -8, TNF-α and granulocyte
macrophage-colony stimulating factor[66]. Lisofylline, like pentoxifylline, has been shown to
diminish proinflammatory cytokine expressions of TNF-α, IL-1 and IL-6 and to
inhibit neutrophil accumulation and edema formation. Unlike pentoxifylline,
lysofylline partly exerts its anti-inflammatory properties by inhibiting the
release of oxidized free fatty acids from cell membranes under oxidative
stress[62].

High-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is a critical mediator in the pathogenesis of
many inflammatory diseases. Penehyclidine hydrochloride inhibits the translocation
of release of HMGB1 from the nucleus to the cytoplasm and the expression of HMGB1
messenger ribonucleic acid in a dose-dependent manner[66]. Administration of penehyclidine hydrochloride
reduces lung water gain, bronchoalveolar lavage protein content, infiltration of
neutrophils, malondialdehyde content and lactate dehydrogenase activity and
enhances superoxide dismutase activity[67]. Penehyclidine hydrochloride also significantly reduces
P(A-a)O2 and RI as well as TNF-α and IL-6 of lung injury, and both
RI and P(A-a)O2 shows a close correlation with TNF-α and IL-6 (Figure 4)[68]. Ulinastatin decreases free radical productions, lowers
ratio of physiological dead space to tidal volume and improves respiratory
function after CPB[69].
Induction of anesthesia with ulinastatin 10,000 units/kg inhibits the excessive
release of serum HMGB1, TNF-α and IL-8 concentrations[70]. Ulinastatin was shown in a systematic review to
have a significant effect on improving oxygenation and shortening the length of
Intensive Care Unit stay[71].
The large dose of propofol (15 mg/kg/hour) attenuated lung leukocyte
sequestration, pulmonary edema and pulmonary hyperpermeability and resulted in
better oxygenation, lung mechanics and histological changes; while the small dose
(4 mg/kg/hour) did not, in endotoxin-induced ALI rabbit model[72]. Treatment with propofol by
intravenous infusion (6 mg/kg/min for 5 min) abrogated or reversed the oleic
acid-induced ALI changes in rats[73]. However, the use of propafol may induce ALI in particular in
the presence of an increased alveolar-capillary permeability, which allowed the
propofol emulsion to leak into the alveoli[74].

Linear correlations between tumor necrosis factor-α or interleukin-6 and
respiratory index or P(A-a)O2
[68]. Left panel=control
group; Right panel=penehyclidine hydrochloride; P(A-a)O2:
alveolar-arterial oxygen pressure difference.

Studies have suggested activation of adenosine receptors may enhance alveolar
fluid clearance and regulate the fluid transport in the lung. The adenosine 2A
receptor agonist GW328267C improves lung function of ALI rats[75]. A randomized clinical trial of
simvastatin in ALI patients revealed the simvastatin-treated group had
improvements in nonpulmonary organ dysfunction on day 14 of treatment. Simvastatin
was well tolerated, with no increase in adverse events. Simvastatin improved
oxygenation and respiratory mechanics, and decreased bronchoalveolar lavage IL-8
by 2.5-fold[76]. Experimental
studies on rats revealed that endothelin-1 inhibited alveolar fluid clearance by
inhibition of amiloride-sensitive epithelial Na+ channels. Endothelin-1
may increase capillary pressure and contribute to pulmonary edema
formation[77]. The
endothelin-1 receptor subtype blockers significantly prevented the pulmonary
vasoconstriction induced by endothelin-1[78]. Atrial natriuretic peptide had a protective effect in the
lipopolysaccharide-induced ALI model[79]. H2 treatment markedly attenuated
lipopolysaccharide-induced lung neutrophil recruitment and inflammation and
intraperitoneal injection of 10 mL/kg hydrogen-rich saline also significantly
attenuated the lipopolysaccharide-induced ALI[80].

ECMO is a therapeutic option for patients with severe ARDS. The indications for ECMO
use in ARDS patients are failed conventional therapy for 24-96 hours and the
conformity of two of the three required slow-entry criteria for ECMO including
PaO2/FiO2 <150 mmHg at PEEP >5 cmH2O,
semistatic compliance <30 mL/cmH2O and right-left shunt >30%. Only
in the patients with life-threatening hypoxemia (PaO2<50 mmHg at
FiO2 1.0 and PEEP>5 cmH2O for>2 hours (fast-entry
criteria) is immediate ECMO commenced[81]. Mols et al.[82] reported one-quarter of their 245 ARDS patients received ECMO
treatment. The survival rate was 55% in ECMO patients and 61% in non-ECMO patients.
However, the role of ECMO in the treatment of ARDS is controversial[83]. In neonates treated with ECMO, a
survival rate of 80% was achieved. In adult patients with ARDS, two randomized
controlled trials revealed the survival rates were 10% and 33%, respectively, in the
ECMO groups[84]. Meta-analysis of 9
studies on a total of 1,058 patients with 386 of them treated with ECMO revealed ECMO
increased the mortality of ARDS patients. Therefore, it seems that ECMO is not
beneficial in adult patients with ARDS as in neonates[85].

Postperfusion lung syndrome is rare but can be refractory. Both ARDS and postperfusion
lung syndrome have similar mechanisms of triggering inflammatory processes. They also
share similar clinical features, diagnostic approaches and management strategies.
However, their etiologies and predisposing risk factors differ between each other.
Inflammatory cascade induced by CPB has been an acceptable mechanical hypothesis. The
prognosis of the postperfusion lung syndrome can be poorer than that of the ARDS. The
potential sequelea of postperfusion lung syndrome such as multiple organ failure and
triple acid-base imbalance can be the principle causes of poor outcome rather than the
lung disorder itself. Choices of CPB circuit and apparatus, innovative CPB techniques,
modified surgical maneuvers and some medicinal agents can be potential preventive
strategies for ALI during CPB. Mechanical ventilation (with low tidal volume and proper
PEEP), pharmaceutical agents and ECMO can be therapeutic options of postperfusion lung
syndrome. With the mature therapeutic options, the survival rate of the patients with
postperfusion lung syndrome and ARDS would be further improved.