Anomalous origin of coronary artery: taxonomy and clinical implication. by Yuan SM
Anomalous origin of coronary artery is uncommon. The taxonomies of anomalous
origin of coronary artery are inconsistent and complex. Conceptual and therapeutic
debates remain. The aim of the present study is to reappraise the concept of
anomalous origin of coronary artery and to discuss the potential hazards and
treatment rationale of this anomaly on basis of literature review.

A comprehensive literature review was made in terms of the taxonomies including
“simple”, “multiple” and “complex” types of anomalous origin of coronary
artery.

Anomalous origin of coronary artery can be simply categorized according to the
ectopically originated coronary artery. There are a couple of complex anatomical
variants: “multiple” type, involving more than one coronary artery or branch,
which can be subdivided into 2 subtypes, A) more than one coronary arteries or
branches arising from one place; and B) two coronary arteries/branches arising
from separate ectopic sites; and “complex” type, associated with acquired heart
disease, or congenital heart defects.

Sudden cardiac death in anomalous origin of coronary artery is associated with the
anatomical features including abnormal coursing, acute angle take-off and ostial
abnormalities. Atherosclerosis is prone to be in the right-sided ectopic and
retroaortic coursing coronary artery. Surgical treatment is a definitive therapy.
Simple coronary artery bypass grafting is not recommended due to the potential
hazards of coronary steal phenomenon and poor patency of mammary arterial grafts,
and modified maneuvers such as coronary ostial reimplantation, impinged coronary
segment unroofing and coronary stent deployment are advocated instead.

A origem anômala da artéria coronária é incomum. As taxonomias de origem anômala
da artéria coronária são inconsistentes e complexas. Os debates conceituais e
terapêuticos permanecem. O objetivo do presente estudo é reavaliar o conceito de
origem anômala da artéria coronária e discutir os riscos potenciais e fundamentos
para o tratamento desta anomalia, com base em revisão de literatura.

A revisão da literatura foi feita com termos das taxonomias, incluindo origem
anômala da artéria coronária “simples”, “múltipla” e “complexa”.

A origem anômala da artéria coronária pode ser simplesmente classificada de acordo
com a origem ectópica da artéria coronária. Há um par de variações anatômicas
complexas: “múltipla”, envolvendo mais de uma artéria coronária ou ramo, que podem
ser subdivididos em dois subtipos: A) mais de uma das artérias coronárias ou ramos
decorrentes de um lugar; e B) duas artérias coronárias/ramos decorrentes de sítios
ectópicos separados; e tipo “complexo”, associado à doença cardíaca adquirida ou
defeitos cardíacos congênitos.

A morte súbita cardíaca de origem anômala da artéria coronária está associada com
as características anatômicas incluindo curso anormal, descolamento de ângulo
agudo e anormalidades ostiais. A aterosclerose é propensa a ocorrer na artéria
coronária ectópica e retroaórtica, do lado direito. O tratamento cirúrgico é uma
terapia definitiva. Revascularização do miocárdio simples não é recomendada devido
aos riscos potenciais do fenômeno de “roubo” do fluxo coronário e patência ruim
dos enxertos com a artéria torácica interna. Manobras modificadas como reimplante
ostial coronário, destelhamento do segmento coronário impingido e implantação de
stent coronário são defendidas em seu lugar.

Coronary artery anomalies are uncommon but potentially lethal with an incidence of about
1% in patients for coronary angiography[1]. Anomalous origin of coronary artery is a common type of congenital
coronary artery anomaly. However, the taxonomies of anomalous origin of coronary artery
are inconsistent and complex without any homogeneity in terms of the conceptual
extensions. Different classifications of anomalous origin of coronary artery have been
proposed by different authors, including single coronary artery, split coronary ostium,
absent left main coronary artery, hypoplastic coronary artery, anomalous location of
coronary ostia and anomalies of intrinsic coronary arterial anatomy[2]. In addition, distinctions between
anomalous origin and normal variant of coronary artery have not been well
described[3]. A taxonomy, which
elaborates the anomalous origin of coronary artery in detail, is scanty. Moreover, the
anomalous origin of coronary artery has significant clinical implications due to its
association with myocardial ischemia[4,5], lethal arrhythmia[6] and even sudden cardiac death[7]. In some patients, atherosclerotic
coronary artery disease or valvular heart disease can be associated with anomalous
origin of coronary artery[8].
Accordingly, this lesion is often called a "malignant" coronary artery
anomaly[9]. The clinical
implications of anomalous origin of coronary artery in relation to the anatomic features
remain to be elaborated. Detailed knowledge of the anatomies of the coronary artery
variations would be necessary for the diagnosis and treatment of the underlying heart
diseases[10]. The aim of the
present study is to reappraise the concept of anomalous origin of coronary artery and to
discuss the potential hazards and treatment rationale of this anomaly on basis of
literature review.

The right coronary artery (RCA), left coronary artery (LCA), left anterior descending
(LAD) and left circumflex (LCx) arteries are defined as "arteries", while the more
distal coronary vessels are defined as "branches"[3]. Moreover, before talking about anomaly, it is necessary to make
clear the concepts of "normal" and "normal variants". Normal is defined as a morphologic
finding >1%, normal variant is an unusual morphologic finding >1%, and anomaly is
a morphologic finding <1% of the general population[11].

Both LAD and LCx separately originating from the left coronary cusp with an absence of a
left main coronary artery (LM) and the conal branch arising from the right coronary cusp
are regarded as normal variants[3].
However, a septal branch arising from the aorta is an anomaly[12]. Based on these definitions, some classifications of
anomalous origin of coronary artery that involving absence of the left main stem are
wrong[13].

There have been many ways of taxonomies of anomalous origin of coronary artery.
Firstly, it can be simply categorized according to the ectopically originated
coronary artery. Based on large patient population studies, it has been recognized
that the LCx is the most common to be ectopically originated followed by single
coronary artery, and ectopic LCA, LAD and RCA accounting for 58.3%, 12.5%, 10.4%,
10.4% and 8.5%, respectively[14].
In a total of 23,300 coronary angiograms, the incidence of the anomalous coronary
arteries was 0.4%: LCx (46, 47%), RCA (25, 25.5%), LM (10, 10.2%), LAD (3, 3.1%),
single coronary arteries (3, 6.1%) and other anomalies (8, 8.2%)[15]. In another series with 24,959
patients with coronary angiograms, 73 (0.3%) had major coronary artery anomalies: 70
(95.9%) had one coronary anomaly and 3 (4.1%) had two coronary anomalies. The most
common anomaly involved the LCx (60%), 69% of which arose from a separate ostium in
the right coronary sinus and 31% as a branch of the RCA[16].

The most frequent categorical method is that of the ectopic origin site, which
involves ectopic origin of coronary artery from, 1) the aorta, either from a wrong
sinus or beyond the sinuses; 2) the pulmonary artery; 3) as a branch of another
coronary artery; 4) other arteries; and 5) the ventricular chamber (Table 1). Ectopic aortic origin is the most
common type, of which an anomalous origin from a wrong sinus of Valsalva predominates
(Figures 1-3)[17,18].

Categories of the ectopic origin of coronary artery.

Right coronary artery arising from the left coronary sinus[10]: (A) from a
separate ostia with the left coronary artery; (B) from the left main stem
coursing between the aorta and pulmonary artery; and (C) from the left main
stem with a retroaortic course.

Left coronary artery arising from the right coronary sinus[12,13]: (A) from a
separate ostia with the right coronary artery; (B) sharing a same ostia with
the right coronary artery coursing between the aorta and pulmonary artery; (C)
sharing a same ostia with the right coronary artery with a retroaortic course;
(D) coursing via the right ventricular outflow tract; and (E) with an anterior
course of the left anterior descending coronary artery and a retroaortic course
of the left circumflex artery.

Coronary artery arising from the noncoronary sinus: (A) left coronary artery
arising from the noncoronary sinus; and (B) both left and right coronary
arteries arising from the noncoronary sinus.

There are a couple of complex anatomical variants with regard to the categories of
the ectopic origin of coronary artery: "multiple" type, involving more than one
coronary artery or branch, which can be subdivided into 2 subtypes: A) more than one
coronary artery or branch arising from one place; and B) two coronary
arteries/branches arising from separate ectopic sites[19]; and "complex" type, associated with acquired heart
disease (coronary artery disease or valve disorder), or congenital heart defects
(common or uncommon).

The most frequent indication for coronary angiography is angina (43.9%)[15]. As a branch of another coronary
artery, anomalous origin of LCA from the proximal RCA may cause severe angina even at
rest, which can be an indication for coronary artery bypass grafting[20].

Origin of coronary artery arising from the innominate artery can be the cause of
syncope[21] or chest pain in
adults[22,23]. Origin of the right coronary artery from the
descending thoracic aorta may be associated with atypical and striking elastotic
changes and wall thickening of the coronary artery as the underlying pathogenesis of
severe consequences[24]. The
circulatory symptoms may also derived from ectopic coronary arterial course between
the pulmonary trunk and aorta in spite of the lack of the atherosclerotic plaques in
the coronary artery[25]. Anomalous
origin of coronary artery can be associated with common congenital heart
defect[26], or with rare
congenital heart defect like cervical aortic arch[27]. Robiseck[28] reported such a case in a 4-year-old boy associated with
tetralogy of Fallot which was successfully repaired without any postoperative
complications. Anomalous origin of coronary artery from other arteries other than
coronary is often associated with more complex congenital heart defects and the
treatment is more challenging and the prognosis is poorer[29]. Total anomalous origin of coronary arteries from
the pulmonary artery can be isolated or combined with other congenital heart defects.
It is often considered a cause of neonatal and infantile death with congenital
coronary anomalies as a result of hypoxia due to the insufficient flow to the
myocardium under lower pressure. Hoganson et al.[30] reported a neonatal death due to a single coronary artery
arising from the pulmonary artery died at 10 day of life. Bharati et al.[31] reported an infant with total
anomalous origin of coronary artery from the pulmonary artery associated with
hypoplastic left heart syndrome died of congestive heart failure on hospital day 3 in
spite of prostaglandin administration. Lloyd et al.[32] reported total anomalous origin of coronary artery
from the pulmonary artery was found during the operation for ventricular septal
defect and aorticopulmonary septal defect in a 7-week old baby. Finally the baby was
failed to be resuscitated from the operation and died. Davis and Lie[33] reported a case of the origin of a
single coronary artery arising from the innominate artery (brachiocephalic trunk).
Associated cardiovascular malformations were truncus arteriosus and a single
ventricle and died 12 hours after birth. Heart failure evidenced by severe pulmonary
and hepatic congestion was the probable cause of death. However, when associated with
a lesion that may enhance the oxygen content or right heart pressure, a longer
survival can be expected.

Anomalous origin of coronary artery can sometimes be associated with acquired heart
disease including coronary artery disease or heart valve disorders. Acute myocardial
infarction has been reported in a patient with anomalous origin of coronary artery
with diffuse coronary stenotic lesions[18]. Kalyani et al.[34] discovered well-formed atherosclerotic plaques in both the aorta
and coronary artery by autopsy in a young male with anomalous origin of RCA as a
branch of the LCx. Anomalous origin of RCA as a branch of LAD was reported in a
54-year-old male patient presenting with acute myocardial infarction in the LAD and
RCA territories[35]. Concurrent
severe stenosis, occlusion and ectasia of coronary artery may present[36]. A 48-year-old man presented with
acute myocardial infarction. On aortography, the LAD, LCx and RCA were seen to arise
separately from the right coronary sinus and there was a diffuse stenotic lesion in
the distal LCx. He was successfully treated with coronary stenting[18]. Coronary artery disease of the RCA
in the normal location with two consecutive 95% stenosis in the proximal section was
once reported in a patient with anomalous origin of LM from the innominate
artery[37]. Modi et
al.[38] reported a
62-year-old male patient with RCA originating from the LAD and LCx and severe mitral
regurgitation. The patient underwent surgery for reimplantation of the anomalous RCA
to an anterior aortic sinus and mitral valve repair by ring annuloplasty with no
complications.

Approximately 5% of the patients with acute myocardial infarction do not have
atherosclerotic coronary artery disease but have other causes for their luminal
narrowing. The nonatherosclerotic narrowing coronary arteries focus on congenital
coronary artery anomalies, coronary fistula and high take-off position of coronary
ostia[39]. The risk of ischemia
is probably exacerbated by the associated anatomical factors, A) flap closure of the
slit-like deformation of the coronary ostium; B) acute (non-orthogonal) angle of
take-off and kinking of the coronary artery as it exits from the aorta; and C)
hypoplasia and/or stenosis of the intramural segment, particularly at the level of the
valvar commissure. In addition, cumulative episodes of myocardial ischemia may lead to
patchy myocardial necrosis and fibrosis responsible for ventricular
arrhythmias[40].

The blood supply to the first portion of the ventricular septum is provided by 1 or 2
descending septal branches from the anomalous LM when it courses between the aorta and
pulmonary trunk. When the anomalous LM courses posteriorly to the aorta, it does not
provide any septal branches. In an anomaly as such, the blood supply to the first
portion of the septum is usually provided by the descending septal branches originating
from the right sinus of Valsalva or from the proximal RCA[41].

Anomalous origin of LCx from the aorta is generally viewed as a benign coronary arterial
anomaly[42]. However, two
patients had myocardial infarction in the distribution of the aberrant vessel[42]. The atherosclerotic predilection is
evident only in anomalous coronary artery arising from the right side and pursuing a
retroaortic course, and the anomalous artery is likely to be responsible for myocardial
infarction in patients 60 years or older[43].

Sudden death (28/49, 57%) and exercise-related death (18/28, 64%) are most common with
anomalous origin of LM from the right coronary sinus. Anomalous origin of RCA from the
left coronary sinus is also frequently associated with exercise-related sudden death
(6/13, 46%). The high risk anatomies responsible for the sudden death are coronary
artery segment coursing between the pulmonary artery and aorta[44], acute angle take-off of the left
coronary artery[45] and ostial
abnormalities including ostial valve-like ridge[46], slit-like orifice[47] and flutebeak-shaped ostium[48]. The anomalous origin of coronary artery may have various degree
of left-to-right shunting, which may lead to steal phenomenon worsening myocardial
hypoxia and predispose cardiac sudden death[17]. Other predisposing risk factors leading to sudden death are
intramural course, interarterial course, vessel spasm and intussusception of the
anomalous artery[3]. A 3-6 folds
higher sudden cardiac death rate was noted in military and athletes with increased
physical activities with anomalous origin of coronary artery than in general population
with the lesion[49].

The diagnosis of anomalous origin of coronary artery from other arteries can be
challenging. Most of the coronary anomalies are asymptomatic and benign but may cause
myocardial ischemia and sudden death[50]. Anomalous origin of coronary artery is often associated with a
pathophysiologic state of inadequate tissue perfusion and subsequent hypoxia[51].

Transthoracic echocardiography may offer indirect diagnostic signs like abnormal
biphasic flows in the left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT), i.e. , systolic flow from
the LVOT and diastolic flow toward the LVOT. The origin of the RCA in the LVOT may be
visualized by computed tomographic angiography and by transthoracic
echocardiography[52]. Combined
coronary angiography and computed tomographic angiography are reliable for the diagnosis
of origin of RCA from the left ventricle[53]. Anomalous origin of left coronary artery from the pulmonary artery
is a rare congenital anomaly and one of the causes of myocardial ischemia. Due to
atypical signs and symptoms in childhood, it can be misdiagnosed as dilated
cardiomyopathy[54]. The
definitive diagnosis can be reached by multislice computed tomography and coronary
angiography[55]. Conventional
angiography and magnetic resonance imaging depict the origin and proximal courses of
these arteries[56].

Kim et al.[57] reported during the
coronary angiography the LCA could not be catheterized and was thus unable to be
demonstrated on right coronary angiography or root aortography in a patient who was
eventually diagnosed with anomalous origin of LCA from the innominate artery.

The management of anomalous origin of coronary artery remains debating. Surgical
treatment is a definitive therapy that is recommended even for asymptomatic patients.
Only a few patients were treated medically with no follow-up available. Simple
ligation of the coronary system is less traumatic and is the simplest alternative,
but the risk of a single ostium coronary system still persists. Some authors
suggested a simple coronary artery bypass grafting. However, others objected due to
the potential hazards of coronary steal phenomenon and poor patency of internal
mammary arterial bypasses, and modified maneuvers such as coronary ostial
reimplantation, impinged coronary segment unroofing and coronary stent deployment
were advocated[58].

It was therefore concluded that internal mammary arterial bypass is not an
appropriate approach for this lesion[59]. In some cases, reimplantation was tried initially but could not
be performed due to the fragility of the anomalous coronary artery. As a result, the
patients required ligation of the anomalous coronary artery. Heart valve repair or
replacement is recommended at the time of coronary surgery for those who are
associated with an acquired heart valve disorder. Although successful reimplantation
of the anomalous coronary artery to the aorta, persistent symptoms and myocardial
ischemia may still be present in some patients. Due to the debates of outcomes and
limited information of long-term follow-up, large series of patients for the
evaluations of their ventricular function and the patency of the reimplanted vessel
are necessary.

Sudden cardiac death in anomalous origin of coronary artery is associated with the
anatomical features including abnormal coursing, acute angle take-off and ostial
abnormalities. Atherosclerosis is prone to be in the right-sided ectopic and retroaortic
coursing coronary artery. Surgical treatment is a definitive therapy. Simple coronary
artery bypass grafting is not recommended due to the potential hazards of coronary steal
phenomenon and poor patency of the internal mammary arterial grafts, and modified
maneuvers such as coronary ostial reimplantation, impinged coronary segment unroofing
and coronary stent deployment are advocated instead. 