Fetal cardiac interventions: an update of therapeutic options. by Yuan SM
 This article aims to present updated therapeutic options for fetal congenital
heart diseases. 

 Data source for the present study was based on comprehensive literature retrieval
on fetal cardiac interventions in terms of indications, technical approaches and
clinical outcomes. 

 About 5% of fetal congenital heart diseases are critical and timely intrauterine
intervention may alleviate heart function. Candidates for fetal cardiac
interventions are limited. These candidates may include critical aortic valve
stenosis with evolving hypoplastic left heart syndrome, pulmonary atresia with an
intact ventricular septum and evolving hypoplastic right heart syndrome, and
hypoplastic left heart syndrome with an intact or highly restrictive atrial septum
as well as fetal heart block. The advocated option are prenatal aortic
valvuloplasty, pulmonary valvuloplasty, creation of atrial communication and fetal
cardiac pacing. 

 Fetal cardiac interventions are feasible at midgestation with gradually improved
technical success and fetal/postnatal survival due mainly to a well-trained
multidisciplinary team, sophisticated equipment and better postnatal care.

 Este artigo tem como objetivo apresentar opções terapêuticas atualizadas para
cardiopatias congênitas fetais. 

 Os dados do presente estudo foram baseados em uma revisão abrangente da
literatura a respeito de intervenções cardíacas fetais em termos de indicações,
abordagens técnicas e resultados clínicos. 

 Cerca de 5% das cardiopatias congênitas fetais são críticas e a intervenção
intrauterina oportuna pode aliviar a função cardíaca. Os candidatos para
intervenções cardíacas fetais são limitados e podem incluir aqueles que são
portadores de estenose valvar aórtica crítica com evolução para síndrome de
hipoplasia do coração esquerdo, atresia pulmonar com septo ventricular íntegro e
com evolução da síndrome de hipoplasia do coração direito e síndrome de hipoplasia
do coração esquerdo com septo atrial intacto ou altamente restritivo, bem como
bloqueio cardíaco fetal. As opções preconizadas são a valvoplastia aórtica fetal,
valvoplastia pulmonar, criação de comunicação interatrial e implante de
marca-passos em fetos. 

 Intervenções cardíacas fetais são viáveis na fase intermediária da gestação com
sucesso técnico e sobrevivência fetal/pós-natal, sendo aprimorados gradualmente,
devido, sobretudo, a uma equipe multidisciplinar bem treinada, equipamentos
sofisticados e melhores cuidados no pós-natal.

Cardiac malformations can be a result of intrinsic myocardial disease or a secondary
adaptive mechanism of fetal heart during in utero development[1]. Pressure and volume stimuli of blood flow through the
fetal heart are important determinants of the development of fetal heart and circulation
during the second and third trimesters[1]. In order to reduce perinatal morbidity and mortality, an early
diagnosis of the fetal congenital heart disease (CHD) in the parturients who are at an
increased risk of CHD is imperative, particularly for those with a family history of
CHD[2]. About 5% of prenatally
diagnosed CHDs including severe aortic stenosis (AS) (1.6%), pulmonary atresia with
intact ventricular septum (PA/IVS) (1.9%) and severe pulmonary valve stenosis (1.5%) can
be critical and therefore require intrauterine therapeutic interventions[3]. Early diagnosis of treatable CHDs may
improve fetal intervention outcomes[4], allowing ventricular growth and angiogenesis for fetus with semilunar
valve stenosis for successful adaptation to extrauterine life[5]. Advanced imaging technology and equipment have made an
accurate diagnosis of most fetal CHDs possible[6]. Among them, echocardiography is a reliable means for prenatal
diagnosis of a wide spectrum of CHDs[3]. At present, diagnosis of CHDs at midgestation (18-24-week
gestation) has become feasible in almost all situations[7]. However, minor errors might occur in echocardiographic
visualization of a CHD probably due to poor image quality, early (<20 weeks) or late
(>34 weeks) gestation, or maternal obesity[7].

Prenatal interventions for structural CHDs are now plausible with high rates of
technical success at midpregnancy[8].
Boston experiences have confirmed candidates for fetal cardiac interventions, which are
critical AS with evolving hypoplastic left heart syndrome (HLHS), PA/IVS and evolving
hypoplastic right heart syndrome, and HLHS with an intact or highly restrictive atrial
septum[9]. Moreover, fetuses
with hypoplasia of the tricuspid valve annulus seem to be good candidates for pulmonary
valve intervention, allowing sufficient right heart growth[6]. Minimal invasiveness (percutaneous access, only one
cardiac puncture, and placental avoidance) and free from complications (fetal
bradycardia, effusions and thrombus) are regarded as an ideal procedure[10].

Severe AS is associated with left ventricular outflow obstruction and may lead to
irreversible left ventricular dysfunction secondary to volume overload with right
heart failure and hydrops fetalis[11]. It may develop into HLHS prenatally and is associated with
poor postnatal survival if left untreated in the uterus[12]. Retrograde flow in the transverse aortic arch,
severe left ventricular dysfunction, monophasic and short mitral valve inflow and
left-to-right flow across the foramen ovale can be determinants of AS progression
into HLHS, in which very few chances of left heart growth and function can be
available for a biventricular outcome[13]. Clinical observations also confirmed pre- and postnatal
evolution of HLHS were associated with not only prenatal critical AS, but also
endocardial fibroelastosis of the left ventricle[14]. By echocardiography, endocardial fibroelastosis
is also implicated in post-interventional outcomes and postnatal heart
growth[15].

The entry criteria for prenatal intervention for critical AS have been advocated
as severe AS or atresia with severe left ventricular dysfunction and the left
ventricular length was not <2 SD below the mean for gestational age at
diagnosis. The timing of intervention should be on an urgent basis because of the
potential for rapid progression into left ventricular growth failure in
fetuses[16].

The first intrauterine balloon aortic valvuloplasty was reported in 1989 for the
treatment of critical AS in two fetuses[12]. However, one died intrauterine post-intervention and the
other died postnatally. The problem encountered during the maneuver was difficulty
of needle withdrawal after the access to the fetal heart, which was afterwards
resolved by the utilization of a stillette needle. Tworetzky et al.[16] reported successful aortic
valvuloplasty, preventing the evolution of HLHS in fetuses with AS in 2004. Of the
20 pregnancies at 21-29-week gestation, technical success rate was 70% and
subsequent postnatal biventricular repair rate was 21%. Further observations by
echocardiography revealed left heart growth arrest in unsuccessful or declined
cases, but ongoing left heart growth in successful cases. Resumed left heart
growth leading to a biventricular circulation at birth was observed in three
babies[16]. Arzt et
al.[17] reported 24 aortic
valvuloplasties in 23 fetuses with critical AS at 26 (range, 21-32)-week
gestation, both technical success and postnatal biventricular repair rates were
66.7%. Recently, Goldstein et al.[18] introduced a standard 0.014-inch Prime-Wire Prestige coronary
guidewire for aortic valvuloplasty. With the aid of a micromanometer pressure
sensor 3 cm from the tip, it was directed into the left ventricle and across the
severely stenotic aortic valve. Immediate aortic pressure drop was seen after the
procedure. This technique allows several potential advantages over conventional
procedures in continuous monitoring of pressure waveforms, improvement of
intraprocedural fetal hemodynamic monitoring and responsiveness to
resuscitation.

Intrauterine aortic valvuloplasty for AS is technically feasible. Success depends
on a series of predictive factors, including cardiac structural changes (severe
endocardial fibroelastosis), devices available (angle of cannula entry, cannula
designs and catheter and wire configurations), fetal positioning, ultrasound
imaging, maneuver sophistications and post-interventional care, etc. In addition,
quick maneuvers may minimize the progressive fetal bradycardia. A successful
procedure was anyway achieved in 81% at 21-26-week gestation fetuses[16]. The mortality and morbidity of
fetal AS were mainly due to technical errors and due to the degree of the
hemodynamic effects of the stenosis and left ventricular adaptation, development
and function during fetal life[19].

However, fetal aortic valvuloplasty was not a definitive solution for fetal AS. In
order to have a biventricular outcome, postnatal interventions are often required,
such as repeated aortic valvuloplasty in most cases, temporary left atrial
decompression, and frequent surgical interventions, such as coarctation repair,
resection of endocardial fibroelastosis, mitral valvuloplasty, etc.[20].

PA/IVS is characterized by complete obstruction to right ventricular outflow tract
with varying degrees of right ventricular and tricuspid valve
hypoplasia[21].
Intrauterine pulmonary valvuloplasty in fetuses with PA/IVS allows potential
growth and functional improvement of the right heart thereby increasing postnatal
survival and biventricular repair[22-25]. Prenatal
treatment of the lesion may prevent development of non-immune hydrops and
intrauterine death[22], however,
only limited cases have been reported[26]. Fetal cardiac intervention for PA/IVS is a challenging
procedure because of the anatomical features of the right ventricular outflow
tract and the difficult access to the pulmonary valve. With advancing gestation, a
steady increase of the right ventricle-to-pulmonary artery gradient could lead to
a high rate of pregnancy termination (61%) and some intrauterine death (5%) if
left untreated[27].

It has been shown that pulmonary valvuloplasty in fetal life is also technically
feasible in midgestation. With optimal fetal positioning with the aid of adequate
echo imaging, a limited maternal laparotomy without uterine exteriorization or
incision could be attained. Fetal pulmonary balloon valvuloplasty can be performed
at 21-32-week gestation under maternal local anesthesia and sedation by inserting
a needle through maternal abdominal wall into the uterine cavity under ultrasound
guidance. Fetal analgesic is then injected before advancing the needle through the
fetal chest wall into the right ventricular infundibulum of the fetus. A guidewire
is inserted through the needle and across the pulmonary valve. A balloon catheter
is inserted and then inflated to dilate the stenotic valve. Access to the right
ventricular outflow tract is acchieved through direct puncture by using a 19-gauge
cannula via a subcostal approach on the fetal chest or an intercostal space next
to the sternum, the cannula tip is directed into the right ventricular outflow
tract and the atretic pulmonary valve is dilated by inflating a coronary
angioplasty balloon. After the final balloon deflation, the wire, balloon and
cannula are removed. The catheter and needle are then withdrawn[26].

Since 2002, prenatal intervention for fetal PA/IVS has been performed for
membranous pulmonary atresia with identifiable pulmonary valve leaflets or
membrane, an intact or highly restrictive ventricular septal defect and right
heart hypoplasia with a tricuspid valve annulus z score of <2. Compared with
control fetuses with PA/IVS who did not undergo prenatal intervention with
postnatal univentricular circulation, the tricuspid valve annulus, right ventricle
length and pulmonary valve annulus grew significantly more from mid- to late
gestation in the six fetuses that underwent successful interventions[25]. Gómez Montes et al.[28] reported fetal intervention was
performed for PA/IVS in four fetuses with technical success in all of them and
with some improvement of the right heart growth and hemodynamics early after the
procedure, thereby increasing the chances for a biventricular repair.

Polat et al.[29] also adopted a
0.014-inch floppy tipped coronary guide wire in the maneuver. The wire-catheter
assembly was introduced through the needle until the balloon emerged. After
deployed in the left pulmonary artery, the balloon was pulled back across the
perforated valve with three consecutive inflations. Post-interventional
echocardiography showed slight improvement in right ventricular compliance. They
performed a successful valvulotomy of the pulmonary valve in a fetus with PA/IVS
at 28-week gestation and fetal hemodynamic improvement was observed following the
procedure. Galindo et al.[23]
reported successful valvuloplasty of the pulmonary valve performed in a fetus with
critical pulmonary valve stenosis and heart failure at 25-week gestation. It is
important to learn that midgestation fetal tricuspid valve z score>-3 and good
tricuspid valve growth are the important factors leading to postnatal
biventricular repair in fetuses with PA/IVS. According to the Boston experience, a
Z-score >-3 is associated with biventricular outcome and a <-3 score with
univentricular palliation[30].

Hypoplastic left heart syndrome is potentially detectable in fetuses of 18-22-week
gestation with a four-chamber view on echocardiography. With left heart
obstruction, the existence of an interatrial communication is important for
oxygenated blood to be distributed to the body and to prevent pulmonary
congestion[31]. Prenatal
intervention on the atrial septum is indicated for an intact or highly restrictive
atrial septum, which promotes profound cyanosis and pulmonary edema after birth,
leading to little effective pulmonary blood flow and resulting in chronic
pulmonary venous hypertension and lymphatic dilation. This can in turn result in
increased perioperative morbidity and mortality with stage I Norwood procedure.
Postnatal atrial septotomy, albeit rapid and effective, may not reverse pulmonary
vasculature pathologies and further mortality in the first few weeks or months of
life. Therefore, midgestation intervention on atrial septum is imperative for
preventing pulmonary vasculature changes, reducing the need for additional or
urgent procedures and improving the infant's surgical outcome.

The maneuver of prenatal interventions on atrial septum has been described. After
acessing the fetal heart, a communication is created by directing the needle
across the atrial septum. A wire and small balloon are forwarded into the left
atrium and a small atrial communication is enlarged by inflation of the
balloon[32]. A larger
series of intrauterine atrial septoplasty in fetuses with HLHS was reported by
Marshall et al.[33]. Of 21
fetuses at 24-34-week gestation who received this procedure, there were 19
technical successes and two fetal deaths. An atrial septal defect of at least 3 mm
in diameter was confirmed to allow postnatal benefit. However, postnatal outcomes
were disappointing with a mortality of 58%. In order to keep septectomy open, a
stent can be deployed across the atrial septum. Chaturvedi et al.[34] performed percutaneous
ultrasound-guided stenting of the atrial septum in 10 fetuses. Two fetuses
developed stent stenosis and died postnatally from pulmonary hypertension and
sepsis, respectively. Kalish et al.[35] reported that nine fetuses at 24-31-week gestation with
HLHS/IAS received fetal atrial septal stent placement, with technical success in
five and failure in four cases. Stent deployment may decompress the left atrium.
Additionally, there were no maternal complications.

Complete heart block can be life-threatening in fetuses. The etiologies were
considered to be inflammation and fibrosis at the atrioventricular node associated
with the production of antibodies[36]. Heart block can progress during pregnancy and may result in
hydrops fetalis and eventual fetal demise[37]. There are few effective treatment options for fetal heart
block, as side effects of fluorinated steroids (betamethasone or dexamethasone)
have been concerned, whereas fetal heart rate and glomerular filtration rate
irrespective of the gestational age were not significantly influenced[38,39]. Moreover, poor response of congenital fetal heart block
to intravenous maternal isoproterenol can be an indication for permanent pacemaker
implant before birth[40]. In
general, a permanent pacemaker is required in about 66% of the cases[40].

The first trial of fetal cardiac pacing with a pacemaker implant for complete
heart block was reported in 1986[41,42]. Initial
attempts of intrauterine percutaneous pacing through a transthoracic approach or
an inferior vena cava route resulted in fetal demise shortly after the procedure.
Later, Assad et al.[43,44] designed two modified pacing
electrodes: a screw-in lead (11/2 turns) and a stitch-on lead, which were tested
in experimental models of fetal heart block induced by cryosurgical ablation of
the atrioventricular node. They found that the screw-in electrode was better for
fetal pacing.

The initially proposed approach was an epicardial pacing lead on the fetal heart
with an extra-uterine pulse generator implanted in the mother. However, a lack of
myocardial fixation and dislodgment of the percutaneous lead due to fetal movement
were the major limitations of the percutaneous approach. To resolve this problem,
an entire single chamber pacing system without exteriorized leads without risk of
dislodgement of the pacing system was therefore developed[45]. Such a design is now possible
because of significant advances made in fetal surgery and fetal intervention,
allowing the pacing system to be deployed through the maternal abdomen under
ultrasound guidance.

Furthermore, Assad et al.[46]
designed a novel prototype T-shaped lead for secure fixation onto the fetal
myocardium and prevention from electrode dislodgement, which could be introduced
via an 18-gauge needle and therefore an open surgery was not needed. The new lead
was tested in fetal goats, suggesting that a gradual increase in the fetal rate,
beginning at 80 beats per minute after implantation would be more reliable for an
adequate fetal cardiac output[47]. Boudjemline et al.[48] developed an implantable fetal pacing lead, which was made
of a flexible quadrifilar coil with outer silicone insulation and a fixed screw on
its distal tip. Attempts in 12 pregnant Pre-Alp ewes at 110-112 day gestation were
successful for anchoring the lead on the ventricular wall in all 12 and on the
atrium in three of them.

The reverse remodeling phenomenon should be even more pronounced in fetal life. Thus,
fetal cardiac interventions were attempted aiming at promoting ventricular growth and
function, decreasing intrauterine death and increasing survival[10]. Fetal cardiac interventions have been
advocated for fetuses with semilunar valve stenosis[16,24,49] or with HLHS with an intact or highly restrictive
atrial septum[33]. In the early years,
fetal cardiac interventions showed poor outcomes, probably related to poor
ultrasonographic imaging, limitations of equipment availability and poor fetal
conditions[50]. Technical
success of fetal cardiac interventions has greatly enhanced postnatal biventricular
outcome, thereby avoiding the need for three-stage palliation or cardiac
transplant[51]. Despite the
progress made in this field, these fetal cardiac interventions remain controversial in
both indications and results[3,52].

There have been relatively fewer prenatal pulmonary valve interventions comparing with
prenatal aortic valve intervention[53]. On the other hand, prenatal interventions for the management of
pulmonary atresia and intact ventricular septum were often associated with increased
risks of preterm delivery and neonatal mortality[49]. Furthermore, pulmonary valve stenosis may be alleviated with
the intrauterine right heart growth and the impact of interventional therapy on the
pulmonary circulation does not seem to be as forceful as that on the systemic
circulation secondary to fetal aortic valvuloplasty[3].

Candidates for fetal arrhythmic interventions have been considered supraventricular
tachycardia refractory to conventional drug with a potential for progression into
hydrops fetalis and fetal demise[54,55]. Immune complete heart block with low
ventricular rate may cause significant decrease in fetal cardiac output, cardiac failure
and hydrops fetalis[56,57]. The poor prognosis of these fetal arrhythmias has
incited the development of alternative therapeutic strategies. Fetal ventricular pacing
has been found to improve ventricular output in experimentally induced complete
atrioventricular block[58]. However,
initial attempts of fetal pacing have failed in human fetuses[4,42,45]. As open fetal surgery for intrauterine pacemaker
insertion has been associated with unacceptable maternal morbidity and fetal demise,
minimally invasive approaches using either transcutaneous ultrasound-guided[59] or fetoscopic approaches[47] have been favored. Both endovascular
route for intracardiac[42] and
epicardial lead anchorages[59] were
attempted. Adaptations of new leads to the fetal anatomy for a secure anchorage are
crucial for obtaining better outcomes of fetal pacing. Fetal cardiac interventions by
direct cardiac puncture are associated with significant fetal morbidity. In order to
avoid direct cardiac puncture, Nugent et al.[60] have employed successfully in an in vitro fetal heart model of
approximating a 32-week gestation with magnetically steerable guide wires from the
hepatic vein to the descending aorta and balloon to the aortic valve, in between 5 and
10 minutes.

The treatment of critical left ventricular outflow tract obstruction in the neonate and
infant remains a significant challenge[61]. Postnatal surgical options include biventricular repair (surgical
aortic valvotomy, balloon aortic valvotomy, Ross/Konno procedure and arch repair with or
without other lesion repair), single ventricular repair (Norwood type), biventricular
repair after initial single ventricular repair and cardiac transplantation[61]. Biventricular repair presents obvious
advantages over univentricular type of repair in terms of better survival and lower
hospitalization costs[62]. Rhodes
scores have been taken as reliable indicators for the determination of a biventricular
or univentricular repair[63]. For
conditions with no possibility of biventricular repair, the expectant parents may
choose, between postnatal palliative management (such as the Norwood procedure for HLHS)
or for interruption of pregnancy[6].
Heart transplantation can be a third option for the parents in saving the baby with
life-threatening, critical AS, which fails to other surgical interventions[64].

At the beginning, the technical success and biventricular repair rates were low, which
were now considered to be mostly attributed to postnatal care other than prenatal
intervention, while technical failure was only responsible for small parts[47]. Only small part of the mortality could
directly correlate with the prenatal intervention; whereas the greater part died
postnatally probably due to the limited postnatal surgical and intensive care. The
considerably improved survival rates and higher rates of postnatal biventricular repair
following fetal dilation of severe semilunar valve obstructions were a result of
proficient surgical and intensive care managements[47]. Most recently, with well-established multidisciplinary team and
equipments, prenatal intervention success and postnatal biventricular repair rates have
been significantly improved[17]. In
Brazil, fetal interventions for CHDs have achieved a 91% success rate. There were two
failures out of the 22 procedures, one was aortic and the other was pulmonary
valvuloplasty[65].

Technical challenges and poor candidate selection are the two major restrictive factors
limiting the development of fetal cardiac interventions. Lee & Comstock[66] emphasized the importance of a
well-established practice guidelines and a standardized diagnostic training team for
prenatal diagnosis of CHDs. A multidisciplinary team with the incorporation of a
pediatric cardiac surgeon with maternal-fetal medicine, interventional cardiologist and
fetal echocardiography subspecialists is warranted. Future directions of fetal cardiac
interventions lie on technical advancements such as computer-assisted
navigation[66], open fetal
cardiac surgery and fetoscopic cardiac surgery (Ebsteins' anomaly with hydrops fetalis,
tetralogy of Fallot and pulmonary valve atresia).

Open fetal cardiac intervention currently remains stagnant at the stage of animal
experiments. It has revealed that midterm ovine fetuses under 30-minute bypass was
associated with decreased cardiac output and increased end-diastolic pressure of the
right ventricle[67]. Impairment of
placental perfusion and respiratory gas exchange have been observed in lamb placenta
when the animals were subjected to normothemic or hypothemic CPB with more severe
impairment seen under hypothermia[68].
Further studies showed right ventricular function of midterm ovine fetuses under
90-minute bypass was better preserved by fibrillatory arrest than by
cardioplegia[69]. During fetal
heart bypass, a volume shift of approximately 100 mL/kg, equivalent to 0.8 mL/kg/min,
occurred and this may require volume replacements during bypass and normal physiologic
supplements after bypass for maintenance of blood volume[70]. Besides, fetal CPB may lead to a profound, early rise
of vasopressin levels, which may in turn impair placental function[71]. These achievements have laid
sufficient foundation for future clinical practice of open fetal cardiac interventions
in human fetuses.

Fetal cardiac interventions (intrauterine balloon aortic valvuloplasty, intrauterine
pulmonary valvuloplasy, prenatal intervention on the atrial septum and fetal cardiac
pacing) for four types of congenital heart defects are feasible during midgestation
aiming at improving fetal cardiac function, minimizing loss of fetus and enhancing
postnatal biventricular repair. The postnatal deaths are more likely to be a result of
candidate selection, effects of improvement of ventricular circulation secondary to
fetal cardiac interventions and surgical technical errors and probably a limited
intensive care. For improving success rate and post-interventional outcomes, a
well-trained team with sophisticated equipment is warranted. With improved patient
selection, technical modifications, for example with a robotic interventional approach,
promising outcomes may be achieved in future cases. Moreover, with the advances of fetal
bypass techniques, it is anticipated that open fetal heart operations would become
feasible to facilitate the early treatment of fetal CHDs in the future.